We are finally here.
It's time to learn.
The first pillar of JavaScript and that is closures now.
As I said before these two pillars I think give you superpowers.
If you understand them deeply as a programmer now you think I'm exaggerating here but hopefully after
these few videos you'll understand why.
Especially when it comes to closures we unlock some really interesting abilities in our programs so
let's learn how to harness their power.
We have these things called closures in JavaScript because of two things that we get.
One is the fact that in JavaScript functions are a first class citizen and we already talked about that.
We know what that is.
We can pass functions around like data like any other type in JavaScript.
We also have this idea of lexical scope that is the JavaScript engine knows based on where our code
is written before we even run the code.
What variables.
Each function has access to and closure is simply that a combination of function and the lexical environment
from which it was declared.
Closures allow a function to access variables from an enclosing scope or environment even after it leaves
the scope in which it was declared.
Sounds pretty confusing right.
And closure is one of the most confusing things but it's an important topic.
So instead of me just talking about it let me demonstrate with code.
Let's say we have a function a and then this function will have a variable called Grampa that has the
grandpa string inside of it or assigned to it.
And then this function returns another function.
So it's a higher order function and we return function b from here and function b will have a variable
inside of it.
Remember function scope that has father again same thing.
String father and that function has or returns a function.
Function C and inside of that function we have a variable called son that has string son.
And finally through all of that we return let's say a template string and this template string will
return a few things for us.
I'll return Grandpa I'll return Father then I'll return.
Son and let's just add some symbols just to make it look nice.
So I've created some functions here and function a function b our higher order functions because while
the return functions function C is just a normal function because at the end of the day we're just returning
a piece of string.
So let's run this code if I run a here and I click Run well it returns function B.
That makes sense right.
So I can assign this to a variable and call it again or I can just invoke the next.
So whatever the invocation of a returns I'm going to call again which I'm going to call function b if
I run this I get.
Function C no surprises there.
What if I run function c if I click Run that I get grandpa father son and if you've been working with
JavaScript this shouldn't surprise you.
Right.
This is the expected behavior but here's my question how did son of all people remember what grandpa
was.
I mean if we call a function a here and let's just say cost our that's a terrible name lots to console
1 well we just ran this function this function was invoked so the only thing we have remaining is this
function.
A got popped off the stack.
So what happens when things get popped off the stack.
Well we remove the variable environment right.
So shouldn't let Grandpa be garbage collected and thrown away because well we removed it from the stack
right somehow.
Son has access to grandpa and also has access to Father even after after we call the B function and
this is what closure is let's visualize what's happening here.
With a closure and by the way this little box is going to be our closure when we run the a function
first well it pops onto the stack or it gets pushed onto the stack and we create a variable environment
right in this context.
Execution has grandpa as a variable it would also have parameters here such as well the arguments keyword.
But because we haven't given it any other parameters there's no other variables here.
Just grandpa and this grandpa once we call functioning well what's going to happen to it.
We have the chain here remember that gives us a link to the global scope.
That means if there were any variables in the global scope or global execution environment then we might
have access to them but for now and here once this gets removed off the stack it's gone.
But Grampa still remains.
And that's because Grandpa over here goes up into this box of closure.
Now why is that because this box over here is technically where the memory heap is right.
It's a bunch of memory.
And as soon as we don't need things anymore well we need to remove it.
However when the garbage collector comes sees Grandpa says there's a closure here it's in the special
closure box and this closure box I can't clean up because there's something that is referencing Grandpa
from inside of it.
So the next B function gets called again and we add it to the stack a new variable environment is created
and we have a father that once we remove Father or once B gets popped up the stack Well once again father
is being referenced by another function inside of it.
So gets put into this closure box and then C comes around finally gets called and we have son variable
here.
Now when we return the statement grandfather father son the C variable environment is going to return
and say All right let's find out what the grandpa variable is it's going to look in the variable environment
and say No I can't find it but then now instead of looking in the global scope or global variable it
looks in this little closure box and says Hey do you have Grandpa.
Yep I do.
Hey do you have a father.
Yep I do how cool is that.
In Javascript does something unique here.
Right the JavaScript engine will make sure that the function has access to all of the variables outside
of the function.
With this closure that is this little box So closure is a feature of JavaScript.
Let's go back to our function again because function C is inside 0 function a and function b the JavaScript
engine is going to say All right I'll create a closure for you.
All of the variables outside of the C function.
I'm going to keep around if C is using it.
That is if we had another variable let's say let random and then it's a random number well.
The JavaScript engine once B is invoked isn't going to keep random around because well it's gonna get
garbage collected.
Nothing's referencing it but the JavaScript engine is going to keep any thing that's still being referenced
by a child.
Function in this case C still needs father and grandpa.
So it's going to keep it around and closures are also called lexical scoping.
Let's think about that.
We've seen that before right lexical scoping lexical means where it is written scoping is what variable
we have access to so by that definition that means the JavaScript engine before we run any code before
we get to line twelve or line 13 already knows which function has access to which variables because
javascript is lexical scope or statically scoped it sees during the first phase where it looks to our
code and says Oh yeah I'm going to keep grandpa around I'm going to keep Father around even if it gets
called because I'm going to create these scope chains for us.
Remember this.
We had this little hidden property scope that created our scope chains and what we have access to so
that the JavaScript engine before we run the code has these little links between the functions and this
works because these values are not on the call stack.
Instead they're on the memory heap right.
And the heap just gets cleaned up by the garbage collection.
But the JavaScript engine says no no no.
We still need some of these variables.
So why can we use closures again.
That's because of what I just mentioned.
We can have functions that return functions functions as first class citizens and we have this idea
of lexical scope where we write the function matters not where we call the function or where we invoke
the function let's look at another example let's say I create a function called BOO AND BOO takes a
string and inside of this function we're going to return another function that will take named will
have another function inside of this that gets returned.
This will be name 2 and then inside of here we'll just console dialog.
Let's say hi or actually just console log three things.
That is String name and name two and a cleaner way of writing this.
With Ara functions is to just simply do this.
So let's do a concert.
Boo equals string which is an error of function which is also going to return a function that finally
returns console log so we can just remove all the brackets.
Just like that and keep it on one line and because we only have one line here we don't need any curly
brackets.
We have console lot so that now if I run loops I do need the bracket.
If I run boo with let's say hi well I get a function that makes sense.
If I run it with Tim get another function.
If I run it with Becca I get high in deca and if you haven't realized why I get so excited about closures
and why you should too is that we can have some hidden powers now.
For example imagine if we just did boo.
Hi.
I know this.
This is a terribly named function but let's say that we have blue string here that equals blue high.
And then let's wait.
I don't know five years and then do Blue String name and then we're going to call blue string.
Now obviously I just commented out here but what I'm showing you here is that when I call blue high
and added to this variable let's add a constant and a concert here I could hypothetically if the JavaScript
engine is running.
Wait 5 years and then finally call boo string and boo string.
Even though it'll be off the stack or the boo function is off the stack we'll still remember for me
this high that we gave it five years ago.
That's because remember parameters are treated just like local variables that get stored in variable
environments.
So I can wait five years and hold onto information in memory doesn't get deleted and I can call it whenever
I want.
Let's take a break and revisit this idea some more.
To understand its true power I'll see in the next one by.